---
date: "1997-10-18"
slug: ordination-statement
title: Statement of Belief
subtitle: An Ordination Council Document
summary: "My statement of belief prepared for the Ordination Council called by the Adams Center, NY, Seventh Day Baptist Church on October 18, 1997."
---

### Introduction

In a letter to Timothy, Paul quoted an early Christian confession. The 
confession said “Great is the mystery of godliness: He who was 
revealed in the flesh, Was vindicated in the Spirit, Beheld by angels, 
Proclaimed among the nations, Believed on in the world, Taken up in 
glory.” (1 Timothy 3:16 NASB) Common confession has been an element of 
Christianity since it began. Whether it was simply “Jesus is Lord” or 
something as complex as the recent *Catechism of the Catholic Church*, 
Christians have expressed their corporate unity in terms of what they 
believe. This work at expressing belief is confession. It is part of 
the daily life of every believer. We are called to confess with our 
lips that Jesus is Lord (Romans 10:9). Words and deeds proclaim to 
those we meet what is at the center of our lives. Yet, we rarely 
strive to capture the essence of our belief in words. Within the 
Christian church, part of our confession is that we shall know the 
truth and the truth shall set us free (John 8:32). Central to 
Christianity is that Jesus Christ embodies and is the only complete 
path to that Truth. Implied by the confession just made is that Truth 
exists and can be known. It is appropriate that individuals and groups 
are occasionally called to express what they believe.

We live in a world that equates belief and opinion. We live in a 
society that frequently does not distinguish between truth and 
feeling. In the world, some people think Christianity is old, 
antiquated, and probably bigoted. For those people, Christianity 
becomes a problem that society needs to solve. This group would either 
deny the existence of truth or deny the ability of Christians to 
discover it. They have evidence to support their claim. We stand today 
in the midst of a divided Christian message. Christianity does 
distinguish between Baptist, Methodist, Catholic, Episcopal, Orthodox, 
and Pentecostal. We proclaim one truth, but we experience diversity in 
method and doctrine. This difference between deeply held belief and 
our experience brings us face to face with one of the hardest parts of 
the Christian life. Belief and experience, thought and feeling do, at 
times, diverge.

This divergence brings question and crisis. It places our faith in a 
difficult position. There are no easy answers in these times of 
crisis. We hold to what is most deeply believed. We begin the process 
of reshaping and re-understanding the world around us. Christians turn 
to God revealed in Jesus Christ as the center and core of their 
belief. God exists and reveals Himself to humanity. He does this 
through His Son, Jesus Christ. As the core of our faith, all other 
things are based on that.

## The Bible

Many years separate us from the events that surround the life of Jesus 
of Nazareth. We did not see him. Our parents did not see him. To claim 
that God revealed in Jesus Christ is the core of our faith makes some 
people laugh. It makes others question how we know that our 
proclamation of Jesus, our confession of faith, is trustworthy. Our 
answer is that God provided for a trustworthy written record of His 
activity with humans. That written record is the Bible. It is a 
document inspired by God’s spirit. It functions as our final authority 
in matters of faith and practice.

The Bible is a document written by many people over a long period and 
gathered by people of faith to serve as a guide for their community. 
It contains many forms of written material: poetry, prose, narrative, 
genealogy, and parable. It was written in Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek. 
It describes the action of God and God’s people through history. The 
Bible claims that God created the world we live in now. This is the 
document Christians turn to when faced with questions they cannot 
answer. This is the document Christians turn to for confirmation of 
answers already formulated. The Bible functions as an authority in 
life of Christians.

There is a difference between calling the Bible an authority and 
calling it the authority. In the world of groups calling themselves 
Christian today, the Bible does not stand alone as a final arbiter of 
truth. Some groups place tradition and Scripture alongside each other. 
Some go so far as place tradition, experience, and Scripture on almost 
equal footing for describing authority. These groups recognize that 
they cannot interpret the Bible without some frame of reference. They 
decided to formalize their framework for biblical interpretation. I 
know that my experience, my training, my life, and my feelings 
influence how I approach and what I learn from Scripture. I cannot 
remove these things before approaching Scripture. I had to know how to 
hear and speak before I could study. Scripture, the Bible, comes to us 
in words. We learn words from our parents and the world around us. The 
words form a language and this language has an impact on how we learn 
and what we hear. We do not approach the Bible outside of our 
experience. The groups that list tradition and experience as part of 
the authority for determining faith and practice are working to 
understand this part of reality.

Authority comes in many forms. Tradition and experience do influence 
how I approach Scripture. This influence functions as authority. This 
kind of authority is real and powerful. However, it is not an 
authority based directly on God’s revealed will. This authority of 
influence is a secondary reflection of God’s will. The reflection is 
sometimes out of focus. Tradition and experience have led the people 
of God astray. They do not always correctly guide us toward the will 
of God. The tradition, experience, and activity of the Pharisees and 
Sadducees in the time of Christ amply illustrate this. The authority 
that tradition and experience have must always be checked with the 
question, “How accurately do they reflect the will of God?”

It is this question that brings me face to face with the reality that 
God’s word is the standard by which to measure our knowledge of God’s 
will. The Bible says that Jesus is the Word of God enfleshed, made 
human. As the human Word of God, His life becomes the final 
interpreting authority of God’s written word. Jesus used the Hebrew 
Scriptures as a reliable revelation of God’s word. Therefore, we can 
trust the Old Testament Scriptures to convey to us the very word of 
God. It is by extension that the gospels and the rest of the New 
Testament become reliable sources of God’s word. God spoke to us 
through His Spirit in the Scriptures. The Scriptures, because of that 
God-given guidance, are “profitable for teaching, for reproof, for 
correction, for training in righteousness” (2 Timothy 3:16). As 
reliable sources the Old and New Testaments become the final authority 
in matters of faith and practice.

The reliability of Scripture in matter of history is a point where 
others can test Christianity. Much of what Christianity deals with 
lies beyond the realm of the physical and therefore outside of that 
which can be verified. The Scripture is a point of contact with the 
physical realm. There are difficult passages in the Bible. There are 
passages that seem to be in conflict with each other. Careful 
archeological work has not verified all the biblical events. Some 
difficult passages can be dealt with through “creative harmonization”. 
Some do not lend themselves to any answer. The weight of archeology in 
the last 100 years does much to lend support to biblical material that 
was under attack 100 years ago. Yet, the question remains, “Can the 
Bible be trusted?”

“Can the Bible be trusted?” I answer with a yes. That which the Bible 
affirms is true. In other words, “The Bible is wholly truthful in all 
that it affirms” (Finger, *Christian Theology*, pg. 218). This 
bypasses questions of spelling and grammar that can never fully codify 
a living language. It also allows authors to speak of things as they 
see them (the sun rises) instead of pushing for a scientifically 
precise answer (the earth rotates). It means that people writing 
Scripture were allowed to round numbers and summarize, to select and 
edit other materials, in the process of writing Scripture. The context 
and genre of the passages being studied can guide interpretation. Yet, 
this position insists that what Scripture affirms is true. Thus, when 
the Scripture affirms that the Red Sea was split and a race of slaves 
and tagalongs passed through the water on dry ground, the event did 
happen. Scripture can be trusted in all that it affirms.

## God

Above all else, Scripture affirms that God is. The Bible, from start 
to finish, is a revelation of God: God’s nature, God’s purpose, God’s 
love. We discover in our study that there is one God who existed 
before time began and created time. He created and sustains the world, 
the solar system, the galaxy, and the universe. God is abundant in 
strength and infinite in understanding (Psalm 147:5). God is perfect, 
unchangeable in purpose, and omnipotent in speech. Power, majesty, 
glory, and dominion belong to God Almighty. These descriptions and 
words should make it abundantly clear that God is beyond any 
description we can make – God is mystery. Yet, God has made Himself 
known for King David could follow the very heart of God (Acts 13:22).

The witness of Scripture is clear: God is one. The witness of 
Scripture is also clear God works with humanity as Father, Son, and 
Spirit. The hand of the Father is evident from Genesis to Revelation. 
The work of the Son is made clear in the gospels. Jesus promised the 
continuing power of God in our lives through His Spirit. The New 
Testament shows this promise becoming reality. We do not claim that 
Father, Son and Spirit are separate deities – for there is but one 
God. Nor do we claim that Father, Son, and Spirit are masks that God 
uses to deal with humanity – for if only masks then revelation is an 
unreliable witness to lies behind. Instead, we claim, based on the 
biblical witness, that God exists eternally in three persons - Father, 
Son and Spirit. This perception of God is not a set of masks. Instead, 
it is a true reflection of the nature of God. God is love and lives 
eternally in “self-sharing, other-regarding, community-forming” love 
(Migliore, *Faith Seeking Understanding*, pg. 64). This incredible 
love of God expresses itself for us in His desire to share the love in 
a personal and community-building relationship with everyone.

It is in this understanding of love that we must define omnipotence, 
omniscience, and immutability. God exercises complete power and 
complete knowledge. His purpose never changes. Yet, our understanding 
of His power, knowledge, and purpose may change as He continues to 
reveal Himself. Jonah was told to cry out against the city of Nineveh. 
His message was, “yet forty days and Nineveh will be overthrown” 
(3:4). Jonah anticipated the utter destruction of the city as God 
exercised judgment upon evil. Instead, a change in heart and attitude 
toward God by the leaders and people overthrew the city. God, that 
day, “relented” (3:10). His purpose, however, did not change. God 
brought an entire city into a new understanding of who He was. His 
power is absolute. His knowledge is infinite. His purpose is 
unchangeable. God’s purpose is to bring us into an eternal covenant 
community with Him. For that reason, His deep love controls His power 
and knowledge. God does not overpower our ability to think or act. It 
is His desire for a God-centered community based on love that gives us 
the chance to choose God or to choose not God. God loves and is just 
when He allows the unrepentant person to taste the fruit of sin: 
death. God loves and forgives the sinner who repents and draws near.

God, who chose to reveal Himself to us in the Scriptures, chooses to 
let us see Him in the form of His Son. The Son of God, revealed to us 
as the Word, existed from the beginning and is God. This Son, this 
word, became flesh and lived among us. While on Earth His name was 
Jesus. This name now belongs to Him and is a name that is higher than 
any other name on earth. Jesus, the messiah, the Son of God, lived on 
earth as a human. God became human. He was born. He grew. He taught. 
Jesus Christ is the “radiance of His glory and the exact 
representation of His nature, and upholds all things by the word of 
His power” (Hebrews 1:3 NASB). Jesus lets us know what God looks like 
in human form.

The amazing thing is that God in human form was not a conquering 
military leader, a charismatic with the force to knock all people off 
their feet, or a rich and influential landowner. God, all-powerful 
God, in human form was a wandering preacher who used His almighty 
power to free people from bondage by becoming a servant. His servant 
mindset shows in the work He did and the work He called His followers 
to do. He never lost track of the one He served and was obedient to 
God the Father even to the point of dying a humiliating death on the 
Cross. His life and death demonstrate to us who God is, and what God 
calls us to be.

His death is the complete and final sacrifice needed for the 
forgiveness of sins. Jesus Christ, by His willing sacrifice, becomes 
our Savior. Jesus Christ, as God, is our Lord. Jesus, as human, 
relates directly to us without the need for a mediator. Jesus, thus, 
is the mediator between God the Father and humankind.

Jesus promised His disciples that a Comforter would come when He left 
them. This Comforter would come and help the disciples remember the 
teaching of Jesus. This Comforter was the Holy Spirit poured on the 
disciples on the day of Pentecost. The work of the Spirit continues 
today. God’s Spirit calls us to God. It is the Spirit of God working 
in our lives that allows us to interpret the Scriptures already God-
Breathed. The Spirit makes us ever more aware of the sin in our life 
and grants us the ability to confront that sin, accept forgiveness, 
and change our course toward that which is righteous. A new life is 
created with the Spirit. The old life is gone and we are transformed. 
This transformation empowers us to build up other believers and 
proclaim to the world in word and action that God loves them.

## Humankind

God loves us? A psalmist once wrote: “When I look at thy heavens, the 
work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars which thou hast 
established; what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the son of 
man that thou dost care for him?” (Psalm 8:3,4 RSV). The world is 
huge. The universe is gigantic. It is incredible to think that with 
all of creation God even takes the time to look at our planet, let 
alone our lives. Even if God takes time to look at us, could He love 
us? The psalmist answers the question with these words: “Yet thou hast 
made him little less than God, and dost crown him with glory and 
honor. Thou hast given him dominion over the works of thy hands; thou 
hast put all things under His feet, all sheep and oxen, and also the 
beasts of the field, the birds of the air, and the fish of the sea, 
whatever passes along the paths of the sea” (Psalm 8:5-8 RSV). God 
loves humanity. He has placed us in a position of honor and 
responsibility. This is something that we should take seriously. His 
hope is that we will all, one day, join in the chorus, “O Lord, our 
Lord, how majestic is thy name in all the earth” (Psalm 8:9 RSV)!

Humans, male and female, have been created in the image of God. We, to 
this day, do not know exactly what part of us represents God’s image. 
We are physical and spiritual beings. We use language and create new 
things. We exercise power and authority over large portions of the 
created world. These human characteristics do reflect some of God’s 
revealed nature. As we saw earlier, a major Christian understanding of 
God is that God is love and lives in community. This part of God’s 
revealed nature is reflected in the way we are created. God created us 
to need fellowship with God and humans. Community and responsibility 
are part of the way God created us. He let Adam and Eve choose between 
following His word and following their own ideas. Humanity, as a 
whole, has been given this opportunity as well. We can choose to 
follow God or choose to follow something else. 

## Sin and Salvation

The voice of a serpent calling from the tree of the knowledge of good 
and evil was enough to pull Eve and Adam off course. Their act 
destroyed the communion they had had with God. Pain, death, 
increasingly hard work, and broken relationships resulted from their 
choice to disobey God. Their disobedience was not an isolated act in 
the history of humanity. God has given humans an understanding of His 
will for their lives. Humans choose to disobey this. Disobedience to 
God’s revealed will is sin. Adam and Eve’s sin broke the relationship 
they had with God. God drove them from the garden and barred their re-
entry. Sin separates people from God. Everyone has sinned. Everyone is 
therefore separated from God.

This might not be a bleak picture if it were not for the fact that our 
very nature calls us to relate to God. That is part of how He created 
us. For humanity to be complete, a personal relationship with God is 
essential. To be separated from God is to be dead. We are, therefore, 
in need of a way to restore the relationship with God. We need to find 
a way to life. Humans need something to bring them back into the 
presence of God. We need a savior.

Without a Savior, we cannot enter the presence of God. Without a 
Savior, we are damned. The biblical images of life without God range 
from discomfort to annihilation. In Jesus parable about staying alert, 
the bridesmaids without extra oil were shut out of the party. The rich 
man in Jesus’ story about Lazarus was in fire and burning with heat 
and thirst. In the parable of the tares, the servants sorted the wheat 
and tares. At the time of harvest, the tares were burned up. In 
Revelation, the fate of those not in the book of life was the second 
death – being cast into a lake of fire created for the devil and his 
messengers. The Biblical message is clear: Living without a Savior is 
living in death. This is not what God wants for humanity.

There is only one way to a relationship with God the Father for those 
who have sinned. Jesus Christ is that way. Salvation, the restoration 
of a broken relationship with God and the hope for a future eternal 
community focused on God, is a free gift of God brought to us through 
the sacrifice of His Son, Jesus Christ. God fully and completely 
identified with humanity by becoming human. He lived a life without 
sin. The communication of Father and Son was never interrupted. Death, 
for moments, snared this perfect life. God was willing to place on 
this life the weight of all sin. Through God’s gracious hand, sin was 
paid for, death was conquered, and we were given a chance to once 
again associate, communicate with God – and look for the day when God’
s people are called home. God’s gift of salvation is freely available 
to all. The person accepting this gift repents of sins, believes that 
God raised Jesus from the dead, and proclaims that Jesus is Lord.

Jesus proclaimed that He was the door to life and that those who 
entered the door would have life and have it abundantly (John 10:10). 
This means more than future happiness. It also means more than having 
riches unthinkable. Salvation is a restoration of our relationship 
with God that changes who we were into something that is incredibly 
new. God’s Spirit acting in new ways in our life causes this change. 
We give God permission to change us from the inside out from the 
moment we accept Christ as our savior. We are a new creation. This 
change allows us new insight into life, as God wants us to see it. 
Those who are God’s people have the Spirit working in their life. 
Those who have God’s spirit working in their life can see evidence of 
the change that God is producing. We call this evidence fruit. Those 
who have been saved will demonstrate the fruit of the spirit. This 
fruit is “love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, 
faithfulness, gentleness,” and “self-control” (Galatians 5:22-23). 
Salvation is God acting in our life now.

## Evangelism and Baptism

God acts in our world. He is not bound by some unalterable law that 
says, “God, You keep your hands off”. He did not wind the world up and 
let it go. The incarnation of Christ tells us many things about God. 
One of those is that He is willing to bend what humans have described 
as “laws of nature” in order to let the true nature of God shine 
through. God can and does break into our history. Sometimes, God 
breaks in, in ways that we call miraculous. Commonly, God breaks into 
history through His people of faith. We are called to do the will of 
the Father.

The Holy Spirit works in the lives of those who have devoted 
themselves to Jesus Christ. He allows them to see, think, love, and 
behave differently than they would otherwise. Jesus told His disciples 
that the second great commandment is to “love your neighbor as yourself
”. When asked for a definition of neighbor, Jesus told the story of 
the Good Samaritan. The neighbor is the person we meet in the midst of 
life – regardless of our condition or theirs. When we love our 
neighbor as ourselves, there will come a time when we share God’s 
gracious and saving message. This is evangelism.

Evangelism is a natural result of God’s love growing in our lives. 
Yet, God is aware that humans can be stubborn and fearful at times. 
For that reason, He reinforced what naturally grows out of our 
reflection of God’s love with a command. The command takes several 
forms for Jesus undoubtedly worked to make sure His disciples heard 
Him. The most famous is the Great Commission of Matthew 28. “Go 
therefore and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them in the 
name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, teaching them to 
observe all that I commanded you; and lo, I am with you always, even 
to the end of the age." Jesus gave this command to a specific group of 
people at a specific point in time. Yet, this command is universal in 
scope. It is a command to go to <i>all nations</i>. It is a command to 
teach <i>all that Christ commanded</i>. Christ also reassured the 
disciples that He was with them <i>until the end of the age</i>.

As God’s Spirit transforms us into the image of Christ, we will work 
harder to share the good news that God has given us. As God’s love 
grows in our lives, we will reach out to more people and look 
especially to those who have little earthly hope. As an outgrowth of 
love, as an obedient response to command, evangelism is part and 
parcel of the life of every believer.

Peter and the disciples took to evangelism as soon as the Spirit 
landed in their lives. They left their place of prayer and hiding on 
the day of Pentecost and went into the crowds. Peter proclaimed that 
prophecy had been fulfilled and the day of the messiah had come. Many 
in the crowd were “pierced to the heart” and asked how to respond to 
this message. The response of Peter was, “repent, be baptized in the 
name of Jesus and receive the gift of the Holy Spirit”. The decision 
to repent is something demonstrated through later choices. The 
reception of the Holy Spirit is made evident by the fruit of the 
Spirit in the believer’s life. Baptism is the public symbol of 
repentance, acceptance of God’s gracious gift, and the intent to allow 
God’s Spirit greater control.

Baptism is a symbol of life regenerated by the power of God. “Do you 
not know that all of us who have been baptized into Christ Jesus were 
baptized into his death? We were buried therefore with him by baptism 
into death, so that as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of 
the Father, we too might walk in newness of life” (Romans 6:3-4). Full 
immersion shows unity with Christ in His complete burial. Breaking the 
surface of the water shows new life beginning with Christ. The symbol 
is strengthened when we realize that Jesus, who did not need to 
repent, joined us in baptism and set the example that He then called 
us to follow.

Baptism publicly marks an inner change in the life of an individual. 
It marks the choice to turn away from lawlessness and to turn toward 
God. Baptism declares the choice to become a new creature set apart by 
God for good works (2 Corinthians 5:17, Ephesians 2:10). It declares 
the choice to become a member of God’s family. Baptism, the action of 
an individual, marks the beginning of a new life in community. God, 
through Peter’s message on the day of Pentecost, pierced the hearts of 
the crowd and led them to be baptized and to join with those who 
accepted Christ. “They were continually devoting themselves to the 
apostles' teaching and to fellowship, to the breaking of bread and to 
prayer” (Acts 2:42). Baptism publicly marks entry into God’s Kingdom.

## The Church and the Lord’s Supper

The kingdom of God is near. It has started its work in our world. 
Although God holds the full reality of his reign from us, He is not in 
a war with Satan. The devil’s fate was sealed from the moment of 
rebellion. No created thing can oppose God and win. God has called all 
believers to work in His Kingdom. We stand today between the 
revelation of God’s plan and the fullness of its reality. God holds 
the fullness of His Kingdom to give all of humanity the chance to 
accept Him as their God. His kingdom stands in our future. He gives us 
a taste of that future by establishing a people on earth called 
together by one name.

The Bible rarely leaves salvation in the realm of individual life. 
Salvation is linked to God’s community. God’s covenant with Abraham 
promised his descendents would be blessed. God called the slaves in 
Egypt “My people”. He promised that this escaped people would become “
a kingdom of priests and a holy nation” (Exodus 19:6). Through 
Jeremiah and the author of Hebrews, God promises us that “I will put 
My law within them, and on their heart I will write it; and I will be 
their God, and they shall be My people” (Jeremiah 31:33). A people 
called together and blessed by God represents God’s future kingdom now.

This people, called by God, is one. God abolished as membership 
requirements many of the distinctions that humans use to separate 
groups. “For all of you who were baptized into Christ have clothed 
yourselves with Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is 
neither slave nor free man, there is neither male nor female; for you 
are all one in Christ Jesus. And if you belong to Christ, then you are 
Abraham's offspring, heirs according to promise” (Galatians 3:27-29). 
There is only one body of believers. God gathers it into one community 
that exists through time and around the globe. This people, called by 
God, guided by His Spirit, directed by Christ, is called the Church.

Paul described the Church. In Ephesians he wrote, “He gave some 
<i>as</i> apostles, and some <i>as</i> prophets, and some <i>as</i> 
evangelists, and some <i>as</i> pastors and teachers” (4:11). This was 
done “for the equipping of the saints for the work of service, to the 
building up of the body of Christ” (4:12). God gives gifts to 
individuals inside the Church. These are given to every believer (4:7; 
1 Peter 4:10). The gifts allow those in the Church to do the work of 
God. Pastors and teachers, evangelists, prophets, and apostles help 
others discover and use their God given gifts. They will work to build 
Christ’s body into a group unified in faith and knowledge. The goal is 
a mature group that measures up to the fullness of Christ. “As a 
result, we are no longer to be children, tossed here and there by 
waves, and carried about by every wind of doctrine, by the trickery of 
men, by craftiness in deceitful scheming” (Ephesians 4:14). God’s love 
directs the growth that prevents doctrinal instability. Instead of 
being blown around, the members of the Church speak truth in love. 
This is so that we can “grow up in all <i>aspects</i> into Him, who is 
the head, <i>even</i> Christ” (4:15). When Jesus Christ is the head “
the whole body, being fitted and held together by that which every 
joint supplies, according to the proper working of each individual 
part, causes the growth of the body for the building up of itself in 
love” (4:16). 

God knows that He created humans with finite bodies and finite minds. 
It is impossible for us to know everyone in the world. We can only 
work within the capabilities God created in us. For that reason, God 
uses local congregations to represent the one Body of Christ. The 
local congregation represents God’s hand in the world. It is the 
working model of God’s loving community. The congregation stands as an 
ambassador to the Covenant of God sealed in the blood of Jesus Christ. 
This means that the local congregation is a covenant community of God’
s chosen people.

This framework supports our faithful attempt to represent God’s body 
in the world. Before people join a local congregation, they must 
accept and publicly proclaim that Jesus Christ is Lord. They should 
submit to baptism and show their unity with our Lord in His death and 
resurrection. Evidence should exist in their lives that attests to the 
regenerating power of God’s spirit. It must be understood that joining 
a local congregation is more than affirming a certain set of 
doctrines. Joining a local congregation is joining a specific physical 
manifestation of God’s covenant community. A local church will have in 
either written or unwritten form a covenant that states how members 
will behave toward God, each other, and those outside the covenant. 
This covenant is a two-way document. The group and person desiring 
membership accept the responsibility the covenant places on them.

A local congregation will do the things expected of the One Church. It 
will build believers up in love. It will teach the words of God. It 
will meet the needs that arise within the local group. It will strive 
to serve Christ by helping those in need of service outside the group. 
A local congregation will also work to demonstrate the idea that God’s 
Church is larger than the group. It will work with other 
congregations. It will work in close association with other churches 
of like faith in the attempt to create a more effective witness.

We know from experience that the local congregation does stray, at 
times, from God’s will. While the congregation seeks to do the will of 
God, it can be distracted from that goal. This distraction functions 
as a betrayal of God’s power in our world. On the night that Jesus was 
betrayed He took common symbols from a Jewish feast and added meaning 
to them. A broken loaf represented His body. A shared cup represented 
the covenant that the blood of Jesus sealed. These symbols are 
elements of a ritual that we call the Lord’s Supper. This ritual, 
properly practiced, brings the focus of the local church back to Jesus 
Christ. It helps the church remember its shared responsibility as the 
Body of Christ. Jesus established this ritual to help us remember Him. 
Paul and the author of Luke indicate that it is something that 
Christians are to do. The Lord’s supper reminds us “as oft as” we 
participate that we proclaim to the world the love of God demonstrated 
in the death of Jesus.

## Sabbath and Eternal Life

The death of Jesus Christ was followed by His resurrection. After 
reassuring the disciples and reinforcing His teaching, Jesus ascended 
to heaven and sat at the right hand of the throne of God. A day will 
come when Jesus will return to earth and proclaim the “great and 
terrible” day of the Lord. This day will see the passing of the 
present heaven and earth. It will see the presentation of a new 
heaven, earth, and Jerusalem. God’s people will receive new physical 
bodies. They will live with God in an eternal community that praises 
God and brings joy to God’s creatures. Death, pain, misery, and 
separation will be no more. The people of God will enter a rest 
prepared for them from the beginning of time.

Just as the new heaven and earth are, this rest is truly beyond 
description. The rest is foreshadowed in this life by God’s gift of 
the Sabbath. It was established by God at creation. He caused the 
people of Israel to remember it in the desert as they fled Egypt. God 
affirmed through the 10 words that the Sabbath was instituted at 
creation (Exodus 20) and was a celebration of God’s saving grace in 
their lives (Deuteronomy 5). This day is the seventh day of the week 
and was set apart by God for a variety of purposes. 

The Sabbath is primarily described as a day of rest. God told the 
Israelites not to work for food or fire on that day. Nehemiah 
demonstrated that commerce was to be avoided. Jesus demonstrated that 
it is appropriate to gather, study, and worship on the day. He also 
showed that a view of work that prevents us from doing good to those 
around us stands in the way of the Sabbath’s intent. It is a day that 
magnifies the freedom that God’s love brings to the world. Captives 
can be set free. The blind can be made to see. The lame and crippled 
can be healed. Jesus proclaimed that He fulfilled Isaiah’s prophecy: “
THE SPIRIT OF THE LORD IS UPON ME, BECAUSE HE ANOINTED ME TO PREACH 
THE GOSPEL TO THE POOR. HE HAS SENT ME TO PROCLAIM RELEASE TO THE 
CAPTIVES, AND RECOVERY OF SIGHT TO THE BLIND, TO SET FREE THOSE WHO 
ARE DOWNTRODDEN, TO PROCLAIM THE FAVORABLE YEAR OF THE LORD” (Luke 
4:18,19). On a Sabbath, Jesus proclaimed that this Scripture was 
fulfilled. The Sabbath becomes a day when we focus all our attention 
on God and His mission.

I believe there is more to the Sabbath than we have even begun to 
discover. It is a demonstration on this planet of the “rest of joy” 
that is set before us. It points to a future reality that can only be 
described in large sweeping strokes of words. Salvation, eternal life 
and the rest we long for begin at the instant a person accepts the 
saving love of God displayed through His Son, Jesus Christ. The 
eternal covenant community we have been invited to join is 
foreshadowed by the local congregation joined in association with 
other churches. This eternal covenant community is a reflection of the 
creator who lives eternally in three persons – Father, Son, and 
Spirit. Here on earth we struggle with analogy and metaphor to 
describe what God reveals. There will come a time when we know fully – 
even as we are now fully known (1 Corinthians 13). May God be praised.